# Exceptions

In Java, "throwing" an exception means creating and signaling an exceptional condition in the program, typically when an error or unexpected situation occurs.

Throwing an exception interrupts the normal flow of the program and propagates the exception object up the call stack until it is caught and handled by an appropriate exception handler (a catch block).

If the exception is not caught, it will eventually reach the top of the call stack and terminate the program, displaying an error message.

---

Exceptions in Java can be either checked or unchecked.

***Checked exceptions*** are checked at compile-time and must be caught or declared in the method signature using the `throws` keyword.

***Unchecked exceptions*** are not checked at compile-time and do not require explicit handling.

---

To throw an exception in Java, you can use the `throw` keyword followed by an instance of an exception class, which is a subclass of the `java.lang.Throwable` class (e.g., `java.lang.Exception` or `java.lang.RuntimeException`).

Example:

```java
public static void validateAge(int age) throws IllegalArgumentException {
    if (age < 0) {
        throw new IllegalArgumentException("Age cannot be negative.");
    }
}

```

In this example, the `validateAge` method checks if the given age is negative.
If it is, an `IllegalArgumentException` (an unchecked exception) is thrown with an error message. The caller of this method can then catch and handle the exception if necessary.

---

Throwing an exception can be used for various purposes in Java, such as:

1. Indicating an error or exceptional condition, like invalid input, file not found, or network issues.
2. Enforcing contracts or preconditions for a method, like ensuring that arguments meet certain criteria before processing.
3. Propagating an error up the call stack, allowing higher-level code to handle it in a more appropriate context.
4. **Separating error-handling code from the main logic of the program, making the code cleaner and more maintainable.**
When throwing exceptions, it is important to follow best practices such as:
    1. using the appropriate exception type
    2. providing meaningful error messages
    3. not using exceptions for flow control

---

[Try-finally-catch](Try-finally-catch%2066c6ba68df3548e0bbe6d6644d6b6b63.md)

[Try-with-resources](Try-with-resources%204e8f9e86294c4e32a64a52c471e7c4af.md)